Seminar 3

This paper presents an industrial case study in a large-scale setting where a technique called Feature Survival Charts for visualization of scoping change dynamics has been implemented and evaluated in three projects. Results are based on empirical data from industrial projects at a large company that is using a product line approach. The company has more than 5000 employees and develops embedded systems for a global market. The development of the FSC chart and corresponding scope tracking measures was performed in an interactive manner that involved practitioners from the case company. The persons that participated in the constant evolution and evaluation include one process manager, two requirements managers and one KPI (Key Performance Indicators) manager. This approach involves a set of meetings and discussion points between the researchers and the practitioners that helped to guide the research. The criteria of the project include (1) the length of analyzed project, (2) the number of features considered in the scope of the project and (3) the possibility to visualize and analyze significant scope changes in the analyzed project. An exporter was made to retrieve the data from the scope parameter of each feature in the Feature List document. This information was later sorted so that each feature is mapped into one row and each value of the scope attribute is mapped to an integer value. A meeting with practitioners was held in order to present and discuss results as well as address issues for future work and in the meeting decision was taken to introduce and evaluate a set of scope tracking measurements that may give a better insight into the scoping process practices and may help to assess their quality. The Feature Survival Chart (FSC), shows scope changes over time which is illustrated on the X-axis. Each feature is positioned on a specific place on the Y-axis so that the complete lifecycle of a single feature can be followed by looking at the same Y-axis position over time. The various scope changes are visualized using different colors. As a result, each scope change can be viewed as a change of the color. The larger the red areas are, the more features are de-scoped in the particular time of the project. Results indicate that in average people experience almost one scope decision per feature for each project. This fact indicates the need for a better understanding of the scoping process, e.g. by visualizing scope changes. A qualitative analysis of the graphs indicates that for all analyzed projects the dominant trend is descoping rather than scope increases. Finally it was concluded that visualization technique gives a better overview of the scoping process of the whole project on a single page size graph. The industrial evaluation has indicated that the method can be applied to large scale projects, which demonstrates the scalability of the method.

Article: Wnuk et al. “What Happened to Our Features? Visualization and Understanding of Scope Change Dynamics in a Large-Scale Industrial Setting”


Article discusses about results from an empirical investigation with 219 respondents aimed at investigating the phenomenon of obsolete software requirements. A survey was conducted to collect empirical data. The goal of the survey was to elicit as much information from industry practitioners as possible in relation to obsolete software requirements (OSRs). The questionnaire was created based on a literature review of relevant topics, such as requirements management, volatility, and requirements traceability. The questionnaire contained 15 open and close-ended questions of different formats, e.g. single choice questions and multiple choice questions. In open-ended questions, respondents could provide their own answers as well as select a pre-defined answer from the list. The answers were analyzed using the open coding method. The survey was conducted among 219 respondents from 45 countries exploring the phenomenon of OSRs by: (1) eliciting a definition of OSRs as seen by practitioners industry, (2) exploring ways to identify and manage OSRs in requirements documents and databases, (3) investigating the potential impact of OSRs, (4) exploring effects of project context factors on OSRs, and (5) defining what types of requirements are most likely to become obsolete. Results were that the OSRs are a significant challenge for companies developing software systems—OSRs were considered serious by 84.3% of our respondents. A clear majority of the respondents indicated no use of methods or tools to support identification and handling OSRs, and only 10% of our respondents reported having automated support and it was concluded that there is a need for developing automated methods or tools to support practitioners in the identification and management of OSRs. These proposed methods need to have effective mechanisms for storing requirements tagged as OSRs, enabling the use of the body of OSRs as decision support for future requirements and their analysis.

Article: Wnuk & Gorschek “Obsolete Software Requirements”
