Seminar 2

Article discusses about a reference framework for software product management, in which the key process areas, namely portfolio management, product road mapping, release planning and requirements management, are identified, as well as the stakeholders and their relations. With this reference framework, a structure for a body of knowledge for software product management is provided. The basic structure of the reference framework is based upon the objects or artifacts of product management, and upon the set of stakeholders identified in the scope of work of the product manager. Professional product management is essentially a matter of well-organized processing of issues related to requirements, products and releases. A hierarchical ordering of these artifacts imposes a structure on the process areas. The scope of work of product management concerns the complete set of products of the company which is known as product portfolio. As the type of work differs when dealing with artifacts from the distinct hierarchy levels, this hierarchy gives rise to a subdivision of software product management into four process areas: portfolio management to deal with the products in the product portfolio; product road mapping to deal with the different releases of each product; release planning to deal with the collections of requirements of each release; and requirements management to deal with the content of each individual requirement. It was concluded that the proposed reference framework for product software management will be first step to position this important industrial domain in the field of scientific research in requirements engineering and will provide a structure for an integrated body of knowledge.
Article: v.d. Weerd & Brinkkemper “Towards a reference framework for software product management

Article discusses about an in-depth study of the interdependencies within 5 distinct sets of requirements, each including 20 high priority requirements of 5 distinct products from 5 different companies. A survey was conducted involving the 5 companies which are from different market segments. Requirements were entered into a specially designed spreadsheet allowing pairwise consideration of all requirements. Then the search for dependencies started with a consideration of requirement 1 and 2, 1 and 3, 1 and so forth. For each pair of requirements there were a number of considerations to make resulting in one of the two cases 1. No relation whatsoever could be found. In this case, requirements manager was asked how certain he was of this, on the scale (possibly, probably, and positively). 2. A relation was found. In this case the respondent could choose one of five types of interdependencies or add any new type if needed.
Five types of interdependencies sets were created. They were:
1.	AND
2.	REQUIRES
3.	TEMPORAL
4.	ICOST
5.	OR
Aiming to support release planning, a simple visualization technique was applied to the requirements and their dependencies in the study. The visualization allowed for identification of singular requirements, clusters of interdependent requirements as well as highly dependent requirements. The conclusion from the study was that only 20% of the requirements are singular which is far from ideal situation. It was also found that few requirements are responsible for a large share of interdependencies. 20% of requirements were involved in 75% of all interdependencies. Thus by supporting the identification of highly dependent requirements. It is possible to reduce the total effort needed to identify and manage interdependencies in a requirements repository.

Article: P. Carlshamre, K. Sandahl, M. Lindvall, B. Regnell, J. Natt och Dag, “An industrial survey of requirements interdependencies in software product release planning”, in Proceedings of the fifth IEEE International Symposium on Requirements Engineering, 2001

This paper reports on findings from a case study aimed at understanding over scoping in largescale, market-driven software development projects, and how agile requirements engineering practices may affect this situation. Based on a hypothesis of which factors that may be involved in an over scoping situation, semi structured interviews were performed with nine practitioners at a large, market-driven software company. The results from the interviews were validated by six (other) practitioners at the case company via a questionnaire. The results provide a detailed picture of over scoping as a phenomenon including a number of causes, root causes and effects, and indicate that over scoping is mainly caused by operating in a fast-moving market-driven domain and how this ever-changing inflow of requirements is managed. Weak awareness of overall goals, in combination with low development involvement in early phases, may contribute to ‘biting off’ more than a project can ‘chew’. Furthermore, over scoping may lead to a number of potentially serious and expensive consequences, including quality issues, delays and failure to meet customer expectations. Finally, the study indicates that over scoping occurs also when applying agile requirements engineering practices, though the overload is more manageable and perceived to result in less wasted effort when applying a continuous scope prioritization, in combination with gradual requirements detailing and a close cooperation within cross-functional teams.

Article: Wnuk et al. “Are You Biting Off More Than You Can Chew? A Case Study on Causes and Effects of Overscoping in Large-Scale Software Engineering”
